
  CONTRIBUTIONS FROM
  THE MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY:
  PAPER 25



  THE MIGRATIONS OF
  AN AMERICAN BOAT TYPE

  _Howard I. Chapelle_


  THE NEW HAVEN SHARPIE             136

  THE CHESAPEAKE BAY SHARPIE        148

  THE NORTH CAROLINA SHARPIE        149

  SHARPIES IN OTHER AREAS           151

  DOUBLE-ENDED SHARPIES             152

  MODERN SHARPIE DEVELOPMENT        154


  THE MIGRATIONS OF AN AMERICAN BOAT TYPE

  _by Howard I. Chapelle_


[Illustration: FIGURE 1.--Scale model of a New Haven sharpie of 1885,
complete with tongs. (_USNM 318023; Smithsonian photo 47033-C._)]






     _The New Haven sharpie, a flat-bottomed sailing skiff, was
     originally developed for oyster fishing, about the middle of the
     last century._

     _Very economical to build, easy to handle, maneuverable, fast and
     seaworthy, the type was soon adapted for fishing along the eastern
     and southeastern coasts of the United States and in other areas.
     Later, because of its speed, the sharpie became popular for racing
     and yachting._

     _This study of the sharpie type--its origin, development and
     spread--and the plans and descriptions of various regional types
     here presented, grew out of research to provide models for the hall
     of marine transportation in the Smithsonian's new Museum of History
     and Technology._

     THE AUTHOR: _Howard I. Chapelle is curator of transportation in the
     U.S. National Museum, Smithsonian Institution._


For a commercial boat to gain widespread popularity and use, it must be
suited to a variety of weather and water conditions and must have some
very marked economic advantages over any other boats that might be used
in the same occupation. Although there were more than 200 distinct types
of small sailing craft employed in North American fisheries and in
along-shore occupations during the last 60 years of the 19th century,
only rarely was one of these boat types found to be so well suited to a
particular occupation that its use spread to areas at any great distance
from the original locale.

Those craft that were "production-built," generally rowing boats, were
sold along the coast or inland for a variety of uses, of course. The New
England dory, the seine boat, the Connecticut drag boat, and the yawl
were such production-built boats.

In general, flat-bottomed rowing and sailing craft were the most widely
used of the North American boat types. The flat-bottomed hull appeared
in two basic forms: the scow, or punt, and the "flatiron," or
sharp-bowed skiff. Most scows were box-shaped with raking or curved ends
in profile; punts had their sides curved fore and aft in plan and
usually had curved ends in profile. The rigs on scows varied with the
size of the boat. A small scow might have a one-mast or two-mast
spritsail rig, or might be gaff rigged; a large scow might be sloop
rigged or schooner rigged. Flatiron skiffs were sharp-bowed, usually
with square, raked transom stern, and their rigs varied according to
their size and to suit the occupation in which they were employed. Many
were sloop rigged with gaff mainsails; others were two-mast, two-sail
boats, usually with leg-of-mutton sails, although occasionally some
other kind of sail was used. If a skiff had a two-mast rig, it was
commonly called a "sharpie"; a sloop-rigged skiff often was known as a
"flattie." Both scows and flat-bottomed skiffs existed in Colonial
times, and both probably originated in Europe. Their simple design
permitted construction with relatively little waste of materials and
labor.

Owing to the extreme simplicity of the majority of scow types, it is
usually impossible to determine whether scows used in different areas
were directly related in design and construction. Occasionally, however,
a definite relationship between scow types may be assumed because of
certain marked similarities in fitting and construction details. The
same occasion for doubt exists with regard to the relationships of
sharp-bowed skiffs of different areas, with one exception--the large,
flat-bottomed sailing skiff known as the "sharpie."




The New Haven Sharpie


The sharpie was so distinctive in form, proportion, and appearance that
her movements from area to area can be traced with confidence. This boat
type was particularly well suited to oyster fishing, and during the last
four decades of the 19th century its use spread along the Atlantic coast
of North America as new oyster fisheries and markets opened. The
refinements that distinguished the sharpie from other flat-bottomed
skiffs first appeared in some boats that were built at New Haven,
Connecticut, in the late 1840's. These craft were built to be used in
the then-important New Haven oyster fishery that was carried on, for the
most part, by tonging in shallow water.

The claims for the "invention" of a boat type are usually without the
support of contemporary testimony. In the case of the New Haven sharpie
two claims were made, both of which appeared in the sporting magazine
_Forest and Stream_. The first of these claims, undated, attributed the
invention of the New Haven sharpie to a boat carpenter named Taylor, a
native of Vermont.[1] In the January 30, 1879, issue of _Forest and
Stream_ there appeared a letter from Mr. M. Goodsell stating that the
boat built by Taylor, which was named _Trotter_, was not the first
sharpie.[2] Mr. Goodsell claimed that he and his brother had built the
first New Haven sharpie in 1848 and that, because of her speed, she had
been named _Telegraph_. The Goodsell claim was never contested in
_Forest and Stream_, and it is reasonable to suppose, in the
circumstances, that had there been any question concerning the
authenticity of this claim it would have been challenged.

[1] _Forest and Stream_, January 23, 1879, vol. 11, no. 25, p. 504.

[2] _Forest and Stream_, January 30, 1879, vol. 11, no. 26, p. 500.

No contemporary description of these early New Haven sharpies seems to
be available. However, judging by records made in the 1870's, we may
assume that the first boats of this type were long, rather narrow, open,
flat-bottomed skiffs with a square stern and a centerboard; they were
rigged with two masts and two leg-of-mutton sails. Until the appearance
of the early sharpies, dugout canoes built of a single white pine log
had been used at New Haven for tonging. The pine logs used for these
canoes came mostly from inland Connecticut, but they were obtainable
also in northern New England and New York. The canoes ranged from 28 to
35 feet in length, 15 to 20 inches in depth, and 3 feet to 3 feet 6
inches in beam. They were built to float on about 3 or 4 inches of
water. The bottoms of these canoes were about 3 inches thick, giving a
low center of gravity and the power to carry sail in a breeze. The
canoes were rigged with one or two pole masts with leg-of-mutton sails
stepped in thwarts. A single leeboard was fitted and secured to the hull
with a short piece of line made fast to the centerline of the boat. With
this arrangement the leeboard could be raised and lowered and also
shifted to the lee side on each tack. This took the strain off the sides
of the canoe that would have been created by the usual leeboard
fitting.[3] Construction of such canoes ceased in the 1870's, but some
remained in use into the present century.

The first New Haven sharpies were 28 to 30 feet long--about the same
length as most of the log canoes. Although the early sharpie probably
resembled the flatiron skiff in her hull shape, she was primarily a
sailing boat rather than a rowing or combination rowing-sailing craft.
The New Haven sharpie's development[4] was rapid, and by 1880 her
ultimate form had been taken as to shape of hull, rig, construction
fittings, and size. Some changes were made afterwards, but they were in
minor details, such as finish and small fittings.

[3] Henry Hall, Special Agent, 10th U.S. Census, _Report on the
Shipbuilding Industry of the United States_, Washington, 1880-1885, pp.
29-32.

[4] Howard I. Chapelle, _American Small Sailing Craft_, New York, 1951,
pp. 100-133, figs. 38-48.

The New Haven sharpie was built in two sizes for the oyster fishery. One
carried 75 to 100 bushels of oysters and was 26 to 28 feet in length;
the other carried 150 to 175 bushels and was 35 to 36 feet in length.
The smaller sharpie was usually rigged with a single mast and sail,
though some small boats were fitted for two sails. The larger boat was
always fitted to carry two masts, but by shifting the foremast to a
second step more nearly amidships she could be worked with one mast and
sail. The New Haven sharpie retained its original proportions. It was
long, narrow, and low in freeboard and was fitted with a centerboard. In
its development it became half-decked. There was enough fore-and-aft
camber in the flat bottom so that, if the boat was not carrying much
weight, the heel of her straight and upright stem was an inch or two
above the water. The stern, usually round, was planked with vertical
staving that produced a thin counter. The sheer was usually marked and
well proportioned. The New Haven sharpie was a handsome and graceful
craft, her straight-line sections being hidden to some extent by the
flare of her sides and the longitudinal curves of her hull.

[Illustration: FIGURE 2.--A New Haven sharpie and dugouts on the
Quinnipiac River, New Haven, Connecticut, about the turn of the
century.]

The structure of New Haven sharpies was strong and rather heavy,
consisting of white pine plank and oak framing. The sides were commonly
wide plank. Each side had two or three strakes that were pieced up at
the ends to form the sheer. The sides of large sharpies were commonly
1-1/2 inches thick before finishing, while those of the smaller sharpies
were 1-1/4 inches thick. The sharpie's bottom was planked athwartships
with planking of the same thickness as the sides and of 6 to 8 inches in
width. That part of the bottom that cleared the water, at the bow and
under the stern, was often made of tongue-and-groove planking, or else
the seams athwartship would be splined. Inside the boat there was a
keelson made of three planks, in lamination, standing on edge side by
side, sawn to the profile of the bottom, and running about three-fourths
to seven-eighths the length of the boat. The middle one of these three
planks was omitted at the centerboard case to form a slot. Afore and
abaft the slot the keelson members were cross-bolted and spiked. The
ends of the keelson were usually extended to the stem and to the stern
by flat planks that were scarphed into the bottom of the built-up
keelson.

The chines of the sharpie were of oak planks that were of about the same
thickness as the side planks and 4 to 7 inches deep when finished. The
chine logs were sawn to the profile of the bottom and sprung to the
sweep of the sides in plan view. The side frames were mere cleats, 1-1/2
by 3 inches. In the 1880's these cleats were shaped so that the inboard
face was 2 inches wide and the outboard face 3 inches wide, but later
this shaping was generally omitted.

[Illustration: FIGURE 3.--Plan of typical New Haven sharpie showing
design and construction characteristics.]

[Illustration: FIGURE 4.--Plan of a large Chesapeake Bay sharpie taken
from remains of boat.]

At the fore end of the sharpie's centerboard case there was an
edge-bolted bulkhead of solid white pine, 1-1/4 or 1-1/2 inches thick,
with scuppers cut in the bottom edge. A step about halfway up in this
bulkhead gave easy access to the foredeck. In the 1880's that part of
the bulkhead above the step was made of vertical staving that curved
athwartships, but this feature was later eliminated. In the upper
portion of the bulkhead there was often a small rectangular opening for
ventilation.

The decking of the sharpie was made of white pine planks 1-1/4 inches
thick and 7 to 10 inches wide. The stem was a triangular-sectioned piece
of oak measuring 6 by 9 inches before it was finished. The side plank
ran past the forward edge of the stem and was mitered to form a sharp
cutwater. The miter was covered by a brass bar stemband to which was
brazed two side plates 3/32 or 1/4 inch thick. This stemband, which was
tacked to the side plank, usually measured 1/2 or 5/8 inch by 3/4 inch
and it turned under the stem, running under the bottom for a foot or
two. The band also passed over a stemhead and ran to the deck, having
been shaped over the head of the stem by heating and molding over a
pattern.

The sharpie's stern was composed of two horizontal oak frames, one at
chine and one at sheer; each was about 1-1/2 inches thick. The outer
faces of these frames were beveled. The planking around the stern on
these frames was vertical staving that had been tapered, hollowed, and
shaped to fit the flare of the stern. This vertical staving was usually
1-3/4 inches thick before it was finished. The raw edges of the deck
plank were covered by a false wale 1/2 to 3/4 inch thick and 3 or 4
inches deep, and by an oak guard strip that was half-oval in section and
tapered toward the ends. Vertical staving was used to carry the wale
around the stern. The guard around the stern was usually of stemmed oak.

The cockpit ran from the bulkhead at the centerboard case to within 4 or
5 feet of the stern, where there was a light joiner bulkhead. A low
coaming was fitted around the cockpit and a finger rail ran along the
sides of the deck. The boat had a small square hatch in the foredeck and
two mast holes, one at the stem and one at the forward bulkhead. A tie
rod, 3/8 inch in diameter, passed through the hull athwartships, just
forward of the forward bulkhead; the ends of the tie rod were "up-set"
or headed over clench rings on the outside of the wale. The hull was
usually painted white or gray, and the interior color usually buff or
gray.

[Illustration: FIGURE 5.--Chesapeake Bay sharpie with daggerboard, about
1885. (Photo courtesy Wirth Munroe.)]

The two working masts of a 35-to 36-foot sharpie were made of spruce or
white pine and had a diameter of 4-1/2 to 5 inches at deck and 1-1/2
inches at head. Their sail hoists were 28 to 30 feet, and the sail
spread was about 65 yards. Instead of booms, sprits were used; these
were set up at the heels with tackles to the masts. In most sharpies the
sails were hoisted to a single-sheave block at the mast heads and were
fitted with wood or metal mast hoops. Because of the use of the sprit
and heel tackle, the conventional method of reefing was not possible.
The reef bands of the sails were parallel to the masts, and reefing was
accomplished by lowering a sail and tying the reef points while
rehoisting. The mast revolved in tacking in order to prevent binding of
the sprit under the tension of the heel tackle. The tenon at the foot of
the mast was round, and to the shoulder of the tenon a brass ring was
nailed or screwed. Another brass ring was fastened around the mast step.
These rings acted as bearings on which the mast could revolve.

Because there was no standing rigging and the masts revolved, the sheets
could be let go when the boat was running downwind, so that the sails
would swing forward. In this way the power of the rig could be reduced
without the bother of reefing or furling. Sometimes, when the wind was
light, tonging was performed while the boat drifted slowly downwind with
sails fluttering. The tonger, standing on the side deck or on the stern,
could tong or "nip" oysters from a thin bed without having to pole or
row the sharpie.

The unstayed masts of the sharpie were flexible and in heavy weather
spilled some wind, relieving the heeling moment of the sails to some
degree. In summer the 35-to 36-foot boats carried both masts, but in
winter, or in squally weather, it was usual to leave the mainmast ashore
and step the foremast in the hole just forward of the bulkhead at the
centerboard case, thereby balancing the rig in relation to the
centerboard. New Haven sharpies usually had excellent balance, and
tongers could sail them into a slip, drop the board so that it touched
bottom, and, using the large rudders, bring the boats into the wind by
spinning them almost within their length. This could be done because
there was no skeg. When sharpies had skegs, as they did in some
localities, they were not so sensitive as the New Haven boats. If a
sharpie had a skeg, it was possible to use one sail without shifting the
mast, but at a great sacrifice in general maneuverability.

[Illustration: FIGURE 6.--North Carolina sharpie with one reef in
moderate gale, about 1885. (Photo courtesy Wirth Munroe.)]

Kunhardt[5] writing in the mid-1880's, described the New Haven sharpie
as being 33 to 35 feet long, about 5 feet 9 inches to 6 feet wide on the
bottom, and with a depth of about 36 inches at stem, 24 inches
amidships, and 12 inches at stern. The flare increased rapidly from the
bow toward amidships, where it became 3-1/2 inches for every 12 inches
of depth. The increase of flare was more gradual toward the stern, where
the flare was equal to about 4 inches to the foot. According to
Kunhardt, a 35-foot sharpie hull weighed 2,000 to 2,500 pounds and
carried about 5 short tons in cargo.

[5] C. P. Kunhardt, _Small Yachts: Their Design and Construction,
Exemplified by the Ruling Types of Modern Practice_, New York, 1886
(rev. ed., 1891, pp. 287-298).

The sharpie usually had its round stern carried out quite thin. If the
stern was square, the transom was set at a rake of not less than 45°.
Although it cost about $15 more than the transom stern, the round stern
was favored because tonging from it was easier; also, when the boat was
tacked, the round stern did not foul the main sheet and was also less
likely to ship a sea than was the square stern. Kunhardt remarks that
sharpies lay quiet when anchored by the stern, making the ground tackle
easier to handle.

[Illustration: FIGURE 7.--Plan of a Chesapeake Bay terrapin smack based
on sketches and dimensions given by C. P. Kunhardt in _Small Yachts:
Their Design and Construction, Exemplified by the Ruling Types of Modern
Practice_, New York, 1886.]

[Illustration: FIGURE 8.--Plan of North Carolina sharpie schooner taken
from remains of boat.]

[Illustration: FIGURE 9.--Plan of North Carolina sharpie of the
1880's.]

The cost of the New Haven sharpie was very low. Hall stated that in
1880-1882 oyster sharpies could be built for as little as $200, and that
large sharpies, 40 feet long, cost less than $400.[6] In 1886 a sharpie
with a capacity for 150 to 175 bushels of oysters cost about $250,
including spars and sails.[7] In 1880 it was not uncommon to see nearly
200 sharpies longside the wharves at Fairhaven, Connecticut, at
nightfall.

[6] Hall, _op. cit._ (footnote 3), pp. 30, 32.

[7] Kunhardt, _op. cit._ (footnote 5), pp. 225, 295.

The speed of the oyster sharpies attracted attention in the 1870's, and
in the next decade many yachts were built on sharpie lines, being rigged
either as standard sharpies or as sloops, schooners, or yawls.

Oyster tonging sharpies were raced, and often a sharpie of this type was
built especially for racing. One example of a racing sharpie had the
following dimensions:


  Length:                                     35'
  Width on deck:                              8'
  Flare, to 1' of depth:                      4'
  Width of stern:                             4-1/2'
  Depth of stern:                             10"
  Depth at bow:                               36"
  Sheer:                                      14"
  Centerboard:                                11'
  Width of washboards or sidedecks:           12"
  Length of rudder:                           6'
  Depth of rudder:                            1'2"
  Height of foremast:                         45'
  Diameter of foremast:                       6"
  Head of foremast:                           1-1/2"
  Height of mainmast:                         40'
  Diameter of mainmast:                       5-1/2"
  Head of mainmast:                           1-1/2"


The sharpie with the above dimensions was decked-over 10 feet foreward
and 4 feet aft. She carried a 17-foot plank bowsprit, to the ends of
which were fitted vertical clubs 8 to 10 feet long. When racing, this
sharpie carried a 75-yard foresail, a 60-yard mainsail, a 30-yard jib, a
40-yard squaresail, and a 45-yard main staysail; two 16-foot planks were
run out to windward and 11 members of the 12-man crew sat on them to
hold the boat from capsizing.

[Illustration: FIGURE 10.--North Carolina sharpie under sail.]

Figure 3 shows a plan of a sharpie built at the highest point in the
development of this type boat. This plan makes evident the very distinct
character of the sharpie in model, proportion, arrangement,
construction, and rig.[8] The sharpie represented by the plan is
somewhat narrower and has more flare in the sides than indicated by the
dimensions given by Kunhardt. The boatmen at New Haven were convinced
that a narrow sharpie was faster than a wide one, and some preferred
strongly flaring sides, though others thought the upright-sided sharpie
was faster. These boatmen also believed that the shape of the bottom
camber fore and aft was important, that the heel of the stem should not
be immersed, and that the bottom should run aft in a straight line to
about the fore end of the centerboard case and then fair in a long sweep
into the run, which straightened out before it passed the after end of
the waterline. Some racing sharpies had deeper sterns than tonging
boats, a feature that produced a faster boat by reducing the amount of
bottom camber.

[8] Full-scale examples of sharpies may be seen at the Mariners' Museum,
Newport News, Virginia, and at the Mystic Marine Museum, Mystic,
Connecticut.

The use of the sharpie began to spread to other areas almost immediately
after its appearance at New Haven. As early as 1855 sharpies of the
100-bushel class were being built on Long Island across the Sound from
New Haven and Bridgeport, and by 1857 there were two-masted, 150-bushel
sharpies in lower New York Harbor. Sloop-rigged sharpies 24 to 28 feet
long and retaining the characteristics of the New Haven sharpies in
construction and most of its basic design features, but with some
increase in proportionate beam, were extensively used in the small
oyster fisheries west of New Haven. There were also a few sloop-type
sharpies in the eastern Sound. In some areas this modification of the
sharpie eventually developed its own characteristics and became known as
the "flattie," a type that was popular on the north shore of Long
Island, on the Chesapeake Bay, and in Florida at Key West and Tampa.

[Illustration: FIGURE 11.--North Carolina sharpie schooner hauled up for
painting.]

The sharpie's rapid spread in use can be accounted for by its low cost,
light draft, speed, handiness under sail, graceful appearance, and
rather astonishing seaworthiness. Since oyster tonging was never carried
on in heavy weather, it was by chance rather than intent that the
seaworthiness of this New Haven tonging boat was discovered. There is a
case on record in which a tonging sharpie rescued the crew of a coasting
schooner at Branford, Connecticut, during a severe gale, after other
boats had proved unable to approach the wreck.

However, efforts to improve on the sharpie resulted in the construction
of boats that had neither the beauty nor the other advantages of the
original type. This was particularly true of sharpies built as yachts
with large cabins and heavy rigs. Because the stability of the sharpie's
shoal hull was limited, the added weight of high, long cabin trunks and
attendant furniture reduced the boat's safety potential. Windage of the
topside structures necessary on sharpie yachts also affected speed,
particularly in sailing to windward. Hence, there was an immediate trend
toward the addition of deadrise in the bottom of the yachts, a feature
that sufficiently increased displacement and draft so that the
superstructure and rig could be better carried. Because of its large
cabin, the sharpie yacht when under sail was generally less workable
than the fishing sharpie. Although it was harmful to the sailing of the
boat, many of the sharpie yachts had markedly increased beam. The first
sharpie yacht of any size was the _Lucky_, a half-model of which is in
the Model Room of the New York Yacht Club. The _Lucky_, built in 1855
from a model by Robert Fish, was 51 feet long with a 13-foot beam; she
drew 2 feet 10 inches with her centerboard raised. According to
firsthand reports, she was a satisfactory cruiser, except that she was
not very weatherly because her centerboard was too small.

[Illustration: FIGURE 12.--North Carolina sharpie schooner converted to
yacht, 1937.]

Kunhardt mentions the extraordinary sailing speed of some sharpies, as
does certain correspondence in _Forest and Stream_. A large sharpie was
reported to have run 11 nautical miles in 34 minutes, and a big sharpie
schooner is said to have averaged 16 knots in 3 consecutive hours of
sailing. Tonging sharpies with racing rigs were said to have sailed in
smooth water at speeds of 15 and 16 knots. Although such reports may be
exaggerations, there is no doubt that sharpies of the New Haven type
were among the fastest of American sailing fishing boats.

[Illustration: FIGURE 13.--Bow of North Carolina sharpie schooner
showing head rigging.]

Sharpie builders in New Haven very early developed a "production"
method. In the initial stages of building, the hull was upside down.
First, the sides were assembled and the planking and frames secured;
then the inner stem was built, and the sides nailed to it, after which
the bulkhead and a few rough temporary molds were made and put in place
and the boat's sides bent to the desired curve in plain view. For
bending the sides a "Spanish windlass" of rope or chain was used. The
chine pieces were inserted in notches in the molds inside the side
planking and fastened, then the keelson was made and placed in notches
in the molds and bulkhead along the centerline. Next, the upper and
lower stern frames were made and secured, and the stern staved
vertically. Plank extensions of the keelson were fitted, the bottom
laid, and the boat turned over. Sometimes the case was made and fitted
with the keelson structure, but sometimes this was not done until the
deck and inboard works were finished.

[Illustration: FIGURE 14.--The entrance of a North Carolina sharpie
schooner and details of her sharp lines and planking. Note scarphs in
plank.]

The son of Lester Rowe, a noted sharpie builder at New Haven, told me,
in 1925, that it was not uncommon for his father and two helpers to
build a sharpie, hull and spars, in 6 working days, and that one year
his father and two helpers built 31 sharpies. This was at a time after
power saws and planers had come into use, and the heavy cutting and
finishing of timber was done at a mill, from patterns.

In spite of Barnegat Bay's extensive oyster beds and its proximity to
New Haven, the sharpie never became popular in that region, where a
small sailing scow known as the "garvey" was already in favor. The
garvey was punt-shaped, with its bow narrower than the stern; it had a
sledlike profile with moderately flaring sides and a half-deck; and it
was rigged with two spritsails, each with a moderate peak to the head
and the usual diagonal sprit.[9] The garvey was as fast and as well
suited to oyster tonging as the sharpie, if not so handsome; also, it
had an economic advantage over the New Haven boat because it was a
little cheaper to build and could carry the same load on shorter
length. Probably it was the garvey's relative unattractiveness and the
fact that it was a "scow" that prevented it from competing with the
sharpie in areas outside of New Jersey.

[9] The foremast of the garvey was the taller and carried the larger
sail. At one time garveys had leeboards, but by 1850 they commonly had
centerboards and either a skeg aft with a rudder outboard or an
iron-stocked rudder, with the stock passing through the stern overhang
just foreward of the raking transom. The garvey was commonly 24 to 26
feet long with a beam on deck of 6 feet 4 inches to 6 feet 6 inches and
a bottom of 5 feet to 5 feet 3 inches.

[Illustration: FIGURE 15.--Midbody and stern of a North Carolina sharpie
schooner showing planking, molding, and other details.]




The Chesapeake Bay Sharpie


The sharpie appeared on the Chesapeake Bay in the early 1870's, but she
did not retain her New Haven characteristics very long. Prior to her
appearance on the Bay, the oyster fishery there had used several boats,
of which the log canoe appears to have been the most popular. Some
flat-bottomed skiffs had also been used for tonging. There is a
tradition that sometime in the early 1870's a New Haven sharpie named
_Frolic_ was found adrift on the Bay near Tangier Island. Some copies of
the _Frolic_ were made locally, and modifications were added later. This
tradition is supported by certain circumstantial evidence.

Until 20 years ago Tangier Island skiffs certainly resembled the sharpie
above the waterline, being long, rather narrow, straight-stem,
round-stern, two-masted craft, although their bottoms were V-shaped
rather than flat. The large number of boat types suitable for oyster
fishery on the Bay probably prevented the adoption of the New Haven
sharpie in a recognizable form. After the Civil War, however, a large
sailing skiff did become popular in many parts of the Chesapeake. Boats
of this type had a square stern, a curved stem in profile, a strong
flare, a flat bottom, a sharply raking transom, and a center board of
the "daggerboard" form. They were rigged with two leg-of-mutton sails.
Sprits were used instead of booms, and there was sometimes a short
bowsprit, carrying a jib. The rudder was outboard on a skeg. These
skiffs ranged in length from about 18 feet to 28 feet. Those in the
24-to 28-foot range were half-decked; the smaller ones were entirely
open.

In the late 1880's or early 1890's the V-bottomed hull became extremely
popular on the Chesapeake, replacing the flat-bottom almost entirely, as
at Tangier Island. Hence, very few flat-bottomed boats or their remains
survive, although a few 18-foot skiffs are still in use.

Characteristics of the large flat-bottomed Chesapeake Bay skiff are
shown in figure 4. While it is possible that the narrow beam of this
skiff, the straightness of both ends of its bottom camber, and its rig
show some New Haven sharpie influence, these characteristics are so
similar to those of the flatiron skiff that it is doubtful that many of
the Bay sharpies had any real relation to the New Haven boats. As
indicated by figures 5 and 7, the Chesapeake flat-bottoms constituted a
distinct type of skiff. Except for those skiffs used in the Tangier
Island area, it is not evident that the Bay skiffs were influenced by
the New Haven sharpie to any great degree, in form at least.

[Illustration: FIGURE 16.--Stern of a North Carolina sharpie schooner
showing planking, staving, molding, and balanced rudder.]

Schooner-rigged sharpies developed on Long Island Sound as early as
1870, and their hulls were only slightly modified versions of the New
Haven hull in basic design and construction. These boats were, however,
larger than New Haven sharpies, and a few were employed as oyster
dredges. After a time it was found that sharpie construction proved weak
in boats much over 50 feet. However, strong sharpie hulls of great
length eventually were produced by edge-fastening the sides and by using
more tie rods than were required by a smaller sharpie. Transverse tie
rods set up with turnbuckles were first used on the New Haven sharpie,
and they were retained on boats that were patterned after her in other
areas. Because of this influence, such tie rods finally appeared on the
large V-bottomed sailing craft on Chesapeake Bay.

The sharpie schooner seems to have been more popular on the Chesapeake
Bay than on Long Island Sound. The rig alone appealed to Bay sailors,
who were experienced with schooners. Of all the flat-bottomed skiffs
employed on the Bay, only the schooner can be said to have retained much
of the appearance of the Connecticut sharpies. Bay sharpie schooners
often were fitted with wells and used as terrapin smacks (fig. 7). As a
schooner, the sharpie was relatively small, usually being about 30 to 38
feet over-all.

Since the 1880's the magazine _Forest and Stream_ and, later, magazines
such as _Outing_, _Rudder_, and _Yachting_ have been the media by which
ideas concerning all kinds of watercraft from pleasure boats to work
boats have been transmitted. By studying such periodicals, Chesapeake
Bay boatbuilders managed to keep abreast of the progress in boat design
being made in new yachts. In fact, it may have been because of articles
in these publications that the daggerboard came to replace the pivoted
centerboard in Chesapeake Bay skiffs and that the whole V-bottom design
became popular so rapidly in the Bay area.




The North Carolina Sharpie


In the 1870's the heavily populated oyster beds of the North Carolina
Sounds began to be exploited. Following the Civil War that region had
become a depressed area with little boatbuilding industry. The small
boat predominating in the area was a modified yawl that had sprits for
mainsail and topsail, a jib set up to the stem head, a centerboard, and
waterways along the sides. This type of craft, known as the "Albemarle
Sound boat" or "Croatan boat," had been developed in the vicinity of
Roanoke Island for the local shad fishery. Although it was seaworthy and
fast under sail, this boat was not particularly well suited for the
oyster fishery because of its high freeboard and lack of working deck
for tonging.

[Illustration: FIGURE 17.--Deck of a North Carolina sharpie schooner
showing U-shaped main hatch typical of sharpies used in the Carolina
Sounds.]

Because the oyster grounds in the Carolina Sounds were some distance
from the market ports, boats larger than the standard 34-to 36-foot New
Haven sharpie were desirable; and by 1881 the Carolina Sounds sharpie
had begun to develop characteristics of its own. These large sharpies
could be decked and, when necessary, fitted with a cabin. In all other
respects the North Carolina sharpie closely resembled the New Haven
boat. Some of the Carolina boats were square-sterned, but, as at New
Haven, the round stern apparently was more popular.

Most Carolina sharpies were from 40 to 45 feet long. Some had a cramped
forecastle under the foredeck, others had a cuddy or trunk cabin aft,
and a few had trunk cabins forward and aft. Figure 6 is a drawing of a
rigged model that was built to test the design before the construction
of a full-sized boat was attempted.[10] The 1884 North Carolina sharpie
shown in this plan has two small cuddies; it also has the U-shaped main
hatch typical of the Carolina sharpie. It appears that the clubs shown
at the ends of the sprits were very often used on the Carolina sharpies,
but they were rarely used on the New Haven tongers except when the craft
were rigged for racing. The Carolina Sounds sharpie shown under sail in
figure 8 is from 42 to 45 feet long and has no cuddy.

[10] In building shoal draft sailing vessels, this practice was usually
possible and often proved helpful. In the National Watercraft Collection
at the United States National Museum there is a rigged model of a
Piscataqua gundalow that was built for testing under sail before
construction of the full-scale vessel.

The Carolina Sounds sharpies retained the excellent sailing qualities of
the New Haven type and were well finished. The two-sail, two-mast New
Haven rig was popular with tongers, but the schooner-rigged sharpie that
soon developed (figs. 9, 11-18) was preferred for dredging. It was
thought that a schooner rig allowed more adjustment of sail area and
thus would give better handling of the boat under all weather
conditions. This was important because oyster dredging could be carried
on in rough weather when tonging would be impractical. Like the Maryland
terrapin smack, the Carolina sharpie schooner adhered closely to New
Haven principles of design and construction. However, Carolina sharpie
schooners were larger than terrapin smacks, having an over-all length of
from 40 to 52 feet. These schooners remained in use well into the 20th
century and, in fact, did not go out of use entirely until about 1938.
In the 1920's and 1930's many such boats were converted to yachts. They
were fast under sail and very stiff, and with auxiliary engines they
were equally as fast and required a relatively small amount of power.
Large Carolina sharpie schooners often made long coasting voyages, such
as between New York and the West Indies.

[Illustration: FIGURE 18.--Deck of a North Carolina sharpie schooner
under sail showing pump box near rail and portion of afterhouse.]




Sharpies in Other Areas


The Carolina Sounds area was the last place in which the sharpie was
extensively employed. However, in 1876 the sharpie was introduced into
Florida by the late R. M. Munroe when he took to Biscayne Bay a sharpie
yacht that had been built for him by Brown of Tottenville, Staten
Island. Afterwards various types of modified sharpies were introduced in
Florida. On the Gulf Coast at Tampa two-masted sharpies and sharpie
schooners were used to carry fish to market, but they had only very
faint resemblance to the original New Haven boat.

[Illustration: FIGURE 19.--Sharpie yacht _Pelican_ built in 1885 for
Florida waters. She was a successful shoal-draft sailing cruiser. (Photo
courtesy Wirth Munroe.)]

The sharpie also appeared in the Great Lakes area, but here its
development seems to have been entirely independent of the New Haven
type. It is possible that the Great Lakes sharpie devolved from the
common flatiron skiff.

The sharpie yacht was introduced on Lake Champlain in the late 1870's by
Rev. W. H. H. Murray, who wrote for _Forest and Stream_ under the pen
name of "Adirondack Murray." The hull of the Champlain sharpie retained
most of the characteristics of the New Haven hull, but the Champlain
boats were fitted with a wide variety of rigs, some highly experimental.
A few commercial sharpies were built at Burlington, Vermont, for hauling
produce on the lake, but most of the sharpies built there were yachts.




Double-Ended Sharpies


The use of the principles of flatiron skiff design in sharp-stern, or
"double-ended," boats has been common. On the Chesapeake Bay a number of
small, double-ended sailing skiffs, usually fitted with a centerboard
and a single leg-of-mutton sail, were in use in the 1880's. It is
doubtful, however, that these skiffs had any real relationship to the
New Haven sharpie. They may have developed from the "three-plank"
canoe[11] used on the Bay in colonial times.

[11] A primitive craft made of three wide planks, one of which formed
the entire bottom.

The "cabin skiff," a double-ended, half-decked, trunk-cabin boat with a
long head and a cuddy forward, was also in use on the Bay in the 1880's.
This boat, which was rigged like a bugeye, had a bottom of planks that
were over 3 inches thick, laid fore-and-aft, and edge-bolted. The
entire bottom was made on two blocks or "sleepers" placed near the ends.
The sides were bevelled, and heavy stones were placed amidships to give
a slight fore-and-aft camber to the bottom. The sides, washboards, and
end decks were then built, the stones removed, and the centerboard case
fitted. In spite of its slightly cambered flat bottom, this boat, though
truly a flatiron skiff in midsection form, had no real relation to the
New Haven sharpie; it probably owed its origin to the Chesapeake log
canoe, for which it was an inexpensive substitute.

[Illustration: FIGURE 20.--Florida sharpie yacht of about 1890.]

R. M. Munroe built double-ended sharpies in Florida, and one of these
was used to carry mail between Biscayne Bay and Palm Beach. Although
Munroe's double-enders were certainly related to the New Haven sharpie,
they were markedly modified and almost all were yachts.

A schooner-rigged, double-ended sharpie was used in the vicinity of San
Juan Island, Washington, in the 1880's, but since the heels of the stem
and stern posts were immersed it is very doubtful that this sharpie was
related in any way to the New Haven boats.




Modern Sharpie Development


The story of the New Haven sharpie presents an interesting case in the
history of the development of small commercial boats in America. As has
been shown, the New Haven sharpie took only about 40 years to reach a
very efficient stage of development as a fishing sailboat. It was
economical to build, well suited to its work, a fast sailer, and
attractive in appearance.

When sailing vessels ceased to be used by the fishing industry, the
sharpie was almost forgotten, but some slight evidence of its influence
on construction remains. For instance, transverse tie rods are used in
the large Chesapeake Bay "skipjacks," and Chesapeake motorboats still
have round, vertically staved sterns, as do the "Hatteras boats" used on
the Carolina Sounds. But the sharpie hull form has now almost completely
disappeared in both areas, except in a few surviving flat-bottomed
sailing skiffs.

Recently the flat-bottomed hull has come into use in small,
outboard-powered commercial fishing skiffs, but, unfortunately, these
boats usually are modeled after the primitive flatiron skiff and are
short in length.

The New Haven sharpie proved that a long, narrow hull is most efficient
in a flat-bottomed boat, but no utilization has yet been made of its
design as the basis for the design of a modern fishing launch.


U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1961

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents,
U.S. Government Printing Office
Washington 25, D.C.      Price 25 cents



Transcriber's note:

Printer's errors have been corrected, all other inconsistencies are
as in the original. The author's spelling has been maintained.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Migrations of an American Boat Type, by 
Howard I. Chapelle

